So each time we turn the tape over, then we have that
15-second protective delay.
Now, first, Professor Fleming, I'd like to know
what interested you in the sea. Why did you choose
the sea as a profession? Well, I was studying as a
chemist at the University of British Columbia and
completed my bachelor's degree in 1929 and stayed
on at the at the University of British Columbia,
take a master's degree in chemistry. And this, as
you should recognize, was the beginning of the
Depression. And it was quite obvious to me that
there were more chemists than were going to be
needed, and that it was particularly difficult to
obtain any sort of graduate student support in
chemistry. And I had become somewhat bored with
the field of chemistry and thought I'd better seek
some other area. And I'd grown up right by the
water. Many of my friends were essentially marine
biologists. I happened to hear about this field
called oceanography, and it seemed very
intriguing. So I was able to obtain a research
assistantship at Scripps Institution.
California in 1931 down there. Had
you not been to Scripps before you acquired it? No.
In those days one didn't travel very much. It was a
major expedition to get to Southern California.
Actually, I went down by ship.
Did you know with whom you wished to work at Scripps
when you went? Really, I expected to work in
chemistry, and at that time the chemist at Scripps
was Eric Moberg, and I did essentially work with
him for a number of years, although I moved out of
the field of chemical oceanography after a few
years and became involved in sort of descriptive
physical oceanography. How long were you at
Scripps? Well, I was there as a graduate student
for four years. And I completed my PhD in 1935 and
then was kept on in a sort of research capacity for
one year just as an assistant. And then in 1936, I
was appointed as an instructor faculty at
Scripps, and this was at the time that Harold
Fairgroup had just been appointed and came in as
the director, which he did in September of 1936.
When did you first acquire the idea of the textbook
that became the standard in the field? Well, this
came more or less by accident, as a lot of these
things do, that Scripps had never had any
particular program and sort of education and when
Harold Spadro came as the director he felt that we
ought to be doing more in this line and he started
some summer courses in oceanography sort of a
general survey course and he and Martin Johnson
and I were the sort of principal lecturers and The
Prentice Hall Publishing Company apparently
heard about this through their grapevine and came
down and suggested that we write down our lecture
notes. And being all innocent, we said yes, we
would be willing to do so. And it was out of this
summer course in oceanography that that the
volume on the oceans finally appeared. It took us
about three years to write it, and it was finished
in 1942. What sort of work were you doing at Scripps
while you were there? Oh, I went down and, do you
mean as a graduate student? As a graduate student
and then old as a... I was sort of a jack of all trades
and have been, I think, all my career. But My
principal interest was originally in some sort of
chemical work, and I did some work on the calcium
carbonate problem, something on nutrients, and
used to
participate in the very limited sort of seagoing
program we had in those days. And then in 1932, I was
given a leave, in a sense, and went up to Berkeley,
to the University of California, to get a little
bit more coursework and to prepare for my general
examinations and when I came back to Scripps from
there and early in 1933
I was told that the Navy wanted somebody to go down
to Central America to carry out some
oceanographic work on board one of the naval
vessels and so I went down and joined the USS
Hannibal which was a vessel used by the then Navy
Hydrographic Office and spent several months
down off the west coast of Panama and Costa Rica
doing just sort of the field routine which had
already been sort of planned. And when I got back to
La Jolla, the said, well, why don't you write up the
results? And so this actually turned out to be my
doctoral thesis and got me into sort of
descriptive physical oceanography. That was
what I was interested in, is when did you get this
first descriptive oceanography that you were in
in the early 30s? And you stayed with that, though,
for two or three years. I think of you more there
than as a chemical oceanographer. Oh, yes. I
haven't really done any chemical oceanography.
since that time, really, because as
soon as I had finished up my thesis on this
particular material, why, Dr. Sverdrup had
arrived and
was very anxious to start a more kind of systematic
program of field work. And this developed in a sort
of indirect way, as many of these enterprises did,
in that the California Fish and Game Commission
was, at that time, concerned with the problem of
the distribution and abundance of California
sardines and wanted to do some oceanographic
work. made available to Scripps the use of a small
patrol vessel called the Bluefin. And in the early
spring, and I think it extended up into the summer
of 1937, we got our first sort of systematic series
of observations off the Southern California
coast. This continued and so on, so we became very
much involved in essentially the regional
oceanography off the coast of California. Who
worked in the sardine fisheries activities with
you? Well, we just did
a certain amount of work on conventional physical
oceanography.
a little bit of chemistry and some work on the
plankton they we never became at that time
directly involved in any of the fish studies but
the the federal government had also become very
much involved in the problem and the two people
that we dealt with a good deal were alton b seti and
lana walford both of what was then i think the
Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, although they
changed their names often. I'm not quite sure of
this one. But they were very much involved in the
fisheries aspect, and also the state fisheries.
And the man in the state fisheries with whom we
worked very closely is now at USC, is Richard B.
Tibby, you may have run across. And he came down
after a year or two and actually finished his Ph.D.
at Scripps on the oceanography of the California
coast. Now, this is really the first time the
Pacific coast is being mapped, is when you're
mapping it now in these several years. Were you
surprised about certain things? Well, I think
it's yes and no.
Because of the interest in the sardine problem,
the region was more or less prescribed for us, and
yet within that area, which extended off the
coast, I imagine about a couple hundred miles,
they wanted considerable detail. So I think one of
the things that was rather original was the fact
that we made repeated studies on a fairly closely
spaced network of stations. And this showed
details that were essentially unanticipated,
certainly. And also, Professor Sverdrup, in
particular, became very interested in the role of
upwelling as it affected waters to the south of
Point Conception. And I think we had some of the
first sort of evidence on the existence of eddies
in the area that these sort of features had not been
identified before.
Who was joining you in Scripps between, let's say,
35 on? You seem to have a whole series of people come
in at Scripps about this time who go on.
The biggest changes occurred, I feel, in about
1931,
which was just about the time I went there as a
graduate student, and that Dr. Vaughan, who was
the director, had been able to get some additional
funds, and he had a really a very imaginative sort
of view of what ought to be done at that time. And he
added two faculty people, Claude Zobel in
microbiology and Dennis Fox essentially in
physiology and biochemistry. And this
represented a major kind of shift in what was going
on at Scripps in the The physical area and the field
work, there were no sort of major additions to the
faculty and staff, except during these years we
had considerable support from people who were
provided to the institution under the WPA, the
Works Progress Administration. One of the
curious things is that the illustrations in my
thesis were all drawn by a man whose background had
been in architecture and was being supported on
these federal funds. And all my graphs looked like
architectural drawings. But we had considerable
staff support, technician support in those days.
people who were assigned to Scripps under the WPA
program. Gene LaFond was one person who worked
very closely with this program, with Svirgrup and
I, and that was about it. Things weren't quite as
large as they are today. Did you find much exchange
among the faculty in that time? In other words,
were you able to come to Let's say people like
Martin Johnson and talk about your problems, many
meetings, this sort of thing? Not particularly.
As far as the kind of research work was concerned,
everybody did their own particular job. But as I
mentioned a few minutes ago, we did collect
plankton samples on these cruises. The
phytoplankton were examined by Mr. Allen and his
associate, Easter Cupp, and Martin Johnson and
his assistants and students did the work on the
zooplankton. So yes, and the group was small
enough that you did sort of see everybody
frequently and there was a good deal of exchange,
yes. But it was not a, it didn't by any means sort of
involve all of the activities at Scripps or all the
faculty.
When does Roger Revell get to Scripps? Well, he
arrived a month or two after I did in the summer of
1931 and came down to work on the sediment samples
that had been collected on the cruise of the
non-magnetic vessel Carnegie during, I think it
was 1928-29,
and he was to carry out this examination
of the material under the direction of Dr. Vaughn,
but He also got interested in a number of things.
And we worked together on several problems, one of
them concerning the solubility of calcium
carbonate and the precipitation of calcium
carbonate in seawater.
And he also used to participate in some of these
cruises that we made before the sardine
investigation began in 1937. In fact, he and I used
to take the research vessel out most of the time
when I acted as captain on deckhands. We had only a
one-man crew who was the engineer on the small
vessel that was available. It's been suggested to
me recently that one of the problems with the
modern oceanographers, they don't get their feet
wet, so to speak. They don't spend enough time on
vessels. Would you agree with that? Yes and no. I
think the
character of the work at sea has changed as the
vessels have become much larger and as the
equipment has become much more complex, and that
the vessel we had the times I'm talking about prior
to the sardine surveys was just called the scripts
and she was a 55 foot trawler type vessel with a one
man permanent crew and so the graduate students in
general used to take out and run the ship
essentially and navigate as necessary do all of
the sampling do all of the sort of deckhand
functions, as well as work on the samples after
they were back in the laboratory. Now it's more
like, I have the feeling as a graduate student goes
out, it's more or less like going on an ocean liner,
that they're just in a sense kind of a passenger on a
big, relatively large vessel. They have very
little to do with the planning or with the
navigation, the operation of the vessels at sea,
and usually don't know very much about what's
going on except the specific sort of project
they're engaged in. So I think we've lost
something in this process. And there's
still some, I think, activities of the type that
I'm reminiscing about that are conducted in some
nearshore work in various institutions. But
still, I find the students have a very sort of
narrow concept of what goes on. There we go. About
15 seconds here. What do you mean? It pauses now?
Yeah, I've got a 15-second delay to make sure we
don't overtake.
Now, it's also been suggested that with the advent
of the computer in terms of collecting data and
evaluating it and so forth, particularly
concerning physical oceanography, that the
physical oceanographer loses touch with what
he's doing. Would you agree with that? Well, I
certainly would, and that's one of the things that
has bothered me a good deal in recent years is the
capability to take more data and to use a computer
for various processing, routine processing,
compilation, manipulation, compilation
analysis, plotting, and so on, that the younger
scientists don't have the kind of familiarity
with the specific information that I think we had
in years gone by. I think I can say, with some
confidence that I used to know every observation
that had ever been made in most of the Pacific
Ocean. And there weren't very many, but I knew
every one and could evaluate
it. I knew whether it was good or bad. I knew how it
was related to other observations and so on. And
this kind of an intimacy is certainly being lost
today, where Students may not even see the set of
original data in any form. Times have changed, and
I'm harking back to a condition that will probably
never prevail again. But I think something has
been lost here.
Now, when When you began to plan your voyages,
let's say around 37 or 38, I'm interested in how you
made your decisions, where to go, what to do. Was it
pretty well dictated by the fisheries itself, or
were you pretty free to do what you wanted to do? No,
I would say that we were fairly free. I'm
talking only in terms of really one more or less
specific evaporation, but within a rather
general frame of reference, why we were allowed to
plan our own program. And, of course, it was
discussed with Alton Setty and Lionel Alford and
others that were involved. But in general, I think
we decided what should be done and how it should be
done, where, when, and so on.
There was a considerable freedom in choice here in
what we did. The other thing we were able to do at
that time was to work out fairly sort of
comprehensive programs as far as types of
information gathered. There's certainly a case
always of trying to optimize what we could do
because we had very limited resources in terms of
money and people and equipment, so we had to select
fairly carefully what we felt we could do. I have to
remember that most of this was even before the days
of the whole mechanical bathy thermograph, the
BT. In fact, we had the experience of working with I
think it was BT number 5, which was sent to us in the
spring of 1941 by Woods Hole, when nobody even knew
whether the instrument would function properly
and had no kind of experience with the kind of
information you could get with a device of that
kind.
When you were at Scripps in this period, was there
much contact with international oceanography?
Did you have any international oceanographers
come through? Yes, we used to have quite a few
visitors, at least relatively speaking, in that
Professor Vaughn, who was the director from,
actually I think it was from 1924 until 1936,
had been relatively active in sort of
international ocean activities. matters and had
a number of friends and professional friends in
foreign countries, Japan, Europe, and so on. And
we were one of the relatively few places that
anyone interested in the ocean would come to visit
in the United States. What I'm trying to say is
there weren't very many places to visit. So we saw a
good many of the of the distinguished people from
other areas. And then when Professor Sverdrup
came in, he had a very close bond with many, many
people in different fields and different
countries, and this sort of continued in a way. And
I can remember, in particular, we had one or more
visits from Helen Hansen, a Norwegian
oceanographer, and so we had reasonably good, I
feel, in some ways, maybe better contacts than we
have today. Now, when you were involved in this in
the 30s, was there sort of a sense of excitement
about moving out towards a new frontier? No, I
don't think so. It was all good fun, but we didn't
see any great manifest destiny or anything like
that. We didn't think in terms of national ocean
policy and so on. We just thought there were
interesting scientific problems to be solved.
And as I look back on it now, that period really
before the war at Scripps, we were very much in sort
of ivory tower, although as I've already
indicated, we were beginning to move into what
might be called applied oceanography as it was
related to some of these fisheries projects. But
ordinarily, though, this is still primarily
research for its own sake rather than sort of the
applied research that comes out between 41 and 45?
Oh,
yes. The funding of the institution at that time,
the Scripps Institution, was basically all
through the University of California, since the
state funds reaching us through the university.
except that in connection with the sardine
investigations, the Federal
Fisheries Agency did provide money to help
operate the vessel, which was the E.W. Scripps at
that time. This is after the bluefin were getting
in. We got a number of omissions and so on in trying
to trace the history of these things. But we
did not consider, as one would probably do now,
that we were dependent on federal funding to
function. We were essentially supported through
the academic funds from the University of
California.
There was also support from some of the members of
the Scripps family, which was available at that
time. There has also been discussion that perhaps
the nature of oceanography has changed for the
worse, and that they have lost sort of the
jack-of-all-trades approach. Would you agree
with that? Well, this is, I think, where personal
prejudice has come in, and I would agree that I feel
that... One of the things that attracted me to the
field originally was the fact that we were able to
deal with what I consider is essentially a unified
system, and where we could cross the disciplinary
boundaries, which we did very freely at that time,
between chemistry, physical aspects, biology,
geology, without anybody raising an eyebrow. And
we did try and deal with the systems as well as we
could, as essentially unified systems. And I
think today it's become fragmented again by
specialization, which is partly, I think, the
result of the interests of the scientists who come
into the field, but it's also being encouraged, in
a sense, by the way in which the federal funding has
become more and more specialized and fragmented.
And I don't consider this desirable at all. Most of
my efforts in recent years have been to try and
bring the subject matter back together again as
much as I can.